Pytorch parallelism (#5916)
Codecademy/docs: content/pytorch/concepts/distributed-data-parallelism/distributed-data-parallelism.md

---
Title: 'Distributed Data Parallelism'

> Description: 'An overview of distributed data parallelism in PyTorch.'

Reviewer: The description is too generic. Explain what distributed data parallelism is within 1-2 lines. 
https://github.com/Codecademy/docs/blob/main/documentation/style-guide.md

Subjects:
  - 'Data Science'
  - 'Machine Learning'
Tags:

>   - 'PyTorch'
>   - 'Data'
>   - 'Data Parallelism'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - 'Data'
  - 'Data Parallelism'
  - 'PyTorch'
```

CatalogContent:
  - 'intro-to-py-torch-and-neural-networks'
  - 'paths/build-a-machine-learning-model'
---

## Introduction to Distributed Data Parallelism

> Distributed Data Parallelism (DDP) in PyTorch is a module that enables users to efficiently train models across multiple GPUs and machines. By splitting the training process across multiple machines, DDP helps reduce training time and facilitates scaling to larger models and datasets. It achieves parallelism by splitting the input data into smaller chunks, processing them on different GPUs, and aggregating results for updates. Compared to `DataParallel`, DDP offers better performance and scalability by minimising device communication overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Distributed Data Parallelism (DDP) in PyTorch is a module that enables users to efficiently train models across multiple GPUs and machines. By splitting the training process across multiple machines, DDP helps reduce training time and facilitates scaling to larger models and datasets. 
It achieves parallelism by splitting the input data into smaller chunks, processing them on different GPUs, and aggregating results for updates. Compared to `DataParallel`, DDP offers better performance and scalability by minimizing device communication overhead.
```

### Key Features

- High performance: Efficient communication using NVIDIA Collective Communications Library (NCCL) or Gloo backend (for Windows platforms).
- Fault tolerance: Handles errors during distributed training.
- Scalability: Suitable for multi-node, multi-GPU setups.

## Syntax

To use DDP, a distributed process group needs to be initialised and wrapped to a model with `torch.nn.parallel.DistributedDataParallel`.

> ```py

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```pseudo
```

# Set up environment variables
os.environ['MASTER_ADDR'] = 'localhost'
os.environ['MASTER_PORT'] = '8000'

# Initialise the process group
dist.init_process_group(backend="nccl", init_method="env://", world_size=4, rank=0)

# Wrap the model with DDP
model = torch.nn.Linear(10, 10).cuda()
model = DDP(model)
```

- `backend`: This is optional and by default, a `gloo` and `nccl` backend will be created.
- `init_method`: This is optional as well and the default is `env://`.

### Required Environment Variables

- `WORLD_SIZE`: The total number of processes.
- `RANK`: Rank of the current process and must be between 0 and WORLD_SIZE - 1.
- `MASTER_ADDR`: The address of the master node.
- `MASTER_PORT`: The port of the master node.

## Example

The following example demonstrates the use of DDP for distributed training:

```py
import os
import torch
import torch.nn as nn
import torch.optim as optim
import torch.distributed as dist
from torch.nn.parallel import DistributedDataParallel as DDP

# Create a function to set up the initialisation process
def setup(rank, world_size):
    os.environ['MASTER_ADDR'] = 'localhost'
    os.environ['MASTER_PORT'] = '8000'

>     dist.init_process("nccl", rank=rank, world_size=world_size)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dist.init_process_group("nccl", rank=rank, world_size=world_size)
```

---
Title: 'Distributed Data Parallelism'

> Description: 'An overview of distributed data parallelism in PyTorch on how it enables efficient training of large models across multiple GPUs.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description: 'Enables users to efficiently train models across multiple GPUs and machines.'
```

Subjects:
  - 'Data Science'
  - 'Machine Learning'
Tags:
  - 'Data'
  - 'Data Parallelism'
  - 'PyTorch'
CatalogContent:
  - 'intro-to-py-torch-and-neural-networks'
  - 'paths/build-a-machine-learning-model'
---

> ## Introduction to Distributed Data Parallelism

Reviewer 2: We can remove this heading as we usually start explaining the term as per our [style guide](https://github.com/Codecademy/docs/blob/main/documentation/style-guide.md).

```suggestion
```

> Distributed Data Parallelism (DDP) in PyTorch is a module that enables users to efficiently train models across multiple GPUs and machines. By splitting the training process across multiple machines, DDP helps reduce training time and facilitates scaling to larger models and datasets.

Reviewer 2: When adding a new term for the first time, we should emphasise it in bold.

```suggestion
**Distributed Data Parallelism (DDP)** in PyTorch is a module that enables users to train models across multiple GPUs and machines efficiently. By splitting the training process across multiple machines, DDP helps reduce training time and facilitates scaling to larger models and datasets.
```

> It achieves parallelism by splitting the input data into smaller chunks, processing them on different GPUs, and aggregating results for updates. Compared to `DataParallel`, DDP offers better performance and scalability by minimizing device communication overhead.

Reviewer 2: We should replace "splitting" with "partitioning" for technical precision.

```suggestion
DDP achieves parallelism by partitioning input data into smaller chunks, processing them on multiple GPUs, and aggregating the results for updates. Compared to `DataParallel`, DDP offers better performance and scalability by minimizing device communication overhead.
```

> ### Key Features

Reviewer 2: This should be h2

```suggestion
## Key Features
```

> - High performance: Efficient communication using NVIDIA Collective Communications Library (NCCL) or Gloo backend (for Windows platforms).
> - Fault tolerance: Handles errors during distributed training.
> - Scalability: Suitable for multi-node, multi-GPU setups.

Reviewer 2: The list headers should be bold so that the reader quickly understands what is being explained.

```suggestion
- **High performance**: Enables efficient communication using _NVIDIA Collective Communications Library (NCCL)_ or _Gloo backend_ (for Windows platforms).
- **Fault tolerance**: Provides mechanisms to handle errors during distributed training.
- **Scalability**: Designed for seamless scaling in multi-node and multi-GPU environments.
```

## Syntax

To use DDP, a distributed process group needs to be initialised and wrapped to a model with `torch.nn.parallel.DistributedDataParallel`.

```pseudo
import os
import torch
import torch.distributed as dist
from torch.nn.parallel import DistributedDataParallel as DDP

# Set up environment variables
os.environ['MASTER_ADDR'] = 'localhost'
os.environ['MASTER_PORT'] = '8000'

# Initialise the process group
dist.init_process_group(backend="nccl", init_method="env://", world_size=4, rank=0)

# Wrap the model with DDP
model = torch.nn.Linear(10, 10).cuda()
model = DDP(model)
```

> - `backend`: This is optional and by default, a `gloo` and `nccl` backend will be created.

Reviewer 2: This can be better written like this -

```suggestion
- `backend` (Optional): Specifies the backend for distributed communication.
	- `nccl` (NVIDIA Collective Communications Library):
		- Optimized for NVIDIA GPUs.
		- Supports high-performance GPU communication using CUDA.
		- Preferred choice for GPU-based distributed training.
	- `gloo`:
		- A cross-platform backend.
		- Used for CPU-based training or on systems without GPUs.
```

> - `init_method`: This is optional as well and the default is `env://`.

Reviewer 2: This needs a better explanation of what it does and the different options available for this parameter.

```suggestion
- `init_method` (Optional): Specifies the method for initializing the process group.
	- `env://`:
		- Uses environment variables to initialize the process group.
		- Simple and commonly used.
	- `file://<path-to-file>`:
		- Uses a shared file to store initialization information.
		- Useful for setups where environment variables aren't feasible.
	- `tcp://<ip>:<port>`:
		- Uses a TCP address for initialization.
		- Typically used in manual multi-node setups.
```

### Required Environment Variables

> - `WORLD_SIZE`: The total number of processes.

Reviewer 2: Explanation can be better like this -

```suggestion
- `WORLD_SIZE`: Defines the total number of processes participating in the distributed training.
```

> - `RANK`: Rank of the current process and must be between 0 and WORLD_SIZE - 1.

Reviewer 2: The constants should be wrapped in backticks.

```suggestion
- `RANK`: Specifies the rank (unique ID) of the current process within the group and must be between `0` and `WORLD_SIZE - 1`.
```

- `MASTER_ADDR`: The address of the master node.
- `MASTER_PORT`: The port of the master node.

## Example

The following example demonstrates the use of DDP for distributed training:

```py
import os
import torch
import torch.nn as nn
import torch.optim as optim
import torch.distributed as dist
from torch.nn.parallel import DistributedDataParallel as DDP

# Create a function to set up the initialisation process
def setup(rank, world_size):
    os.environ['MASTER_ADDR'] = 'localhost'
    os.environ['MASTER_PORT'] = '8000'
    dist.init_process_group("nccl", rank=rank, world_size=world_size)

# All resources allocated to the process group are released after process is complete
def cleanup():
    dist.destroy_process_group()

def main():
    setup(0, 4)

    # Model and data
    model = nn.Linear(10, 10).cuda()
    ddp_model = DDP(model)
    optimiser = optim.SGD(ddp_model.parameters(), lr=0.01)

    # Dummy data and labels
    data = torch.randn(20, 10).cuda()
    labels = torch.randn(20, 10).cuda()

    # Training
    for _ in range(10):
        optimiser.zero_grad()
        outputs = ddp_model(data)

>         loss = nn.MSELoss()(outputs, labels)
>         loss.backward()

Reviewer 2: Add a print statement to get a better idea of what's happening in the example on running -

```suggestion
        loss = nn.MSELoss()(outputs, labels)
        print(f"Epoch {epoch + 1}, Loss: {loss.item():.4f}")
        loss.backward()
```

The add output for this code - 

When this code is executed, the output might look like this (exact values will vary due to randomness):

```shell
Epoch 1, Loss: 1.2345
Epoch 2, Loss: 0.8765
Epoch 3, Loss: 0.5432
```

This output demonstrates that the DDP setup functions correctly, distributing the data and computing gradients across GPUs. If the program were run with multiple processes (e.g., `world_size=4`), each process would handle its share of the workload.
